All right.
Would you turn with me to Genesis chapter 41, chapter by chapter, verse by verse?
And we've come in from paradise, Genesis to prison, the fall of man,
Now we're working towards the redemption of man in this book of beginning, and God chooses to use this man.
Twenty-five percent of the beginning book is written to Joseph, and we'll see God wove in, and I'm not going to spend that much time.
It's a fascinating study as you look at Joseph.
He wasn't sinless, but there was never a sin that was mentioned regarding him.
and he's a picture of Jesus Christ, and there's fascinating parallelisms that we'll see, and I'll throw a few here and there, but I wanna stay on the focus of, God takes this young man, he's 17 years old, before the end of this chapter, he's gonna be, we'll see at 30, the age that Jesus started his public ministry, but God is showing us, through this man,
All things work together for good, for those in love God.
Do you believe that?
We have to settle on that, especially in the day and hour that we live in the time and seasons that we do.
And Joseph would be recorded,
But as for you, you meant evil against me, but God meant it for good in order to bring it about as it is this day to save many people alive.
And we sit here because of a faithful Joseph, and we're going to talk about that as we go through that.
Hebrews 12, as we look at Him, as we consider what Jesus would speak to us.
Therefore, we also, since we are surrounded by so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight in the sin which so easily ensnares us and let us run with endorns to race to the set before us.
Looking on to Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, the spising, the shame, and has set down at the right hand of the throne of God.
We have these great witnesses, and Joseph, one of us, to speak to us, and then 1 Corinthians 9, 24, been weaving through the last couple of weeks as a theme.
Do you not know that those who run in the race all run, but one receives the prize, run in such a way that you may obtain it?
Church, let's finish strong.
Let's finish well.
And everyone who competes for the prize is temperate in all things.
Now they do it to obtain a perishable crown, but we for an imperishable crown.
Father, we thank you for this word that you have reserved for us withstanding all the hammers that have come against it to try to destroy it.
misusing it and misquoting it and then twisting it.
But it is the word that is alive and living and sharper than a two-edged sword.
And Lord, I pray that this word would penetrate our hearts for the days that we live, whether it's in our home, on the ball field, in the school yard, in the campus, at the university, in the kitchen with our family, or in the workplace.
Lord, it's a word that penetrates.
And I am so thankful that be in this passage on this day in your name, amen.
And so I will take these at high level and let them kind of tell the story that they do the title of my message, then it came to pass.
And without
a further introduction of what we're gonna study today.
Verse one, then it came to pass at the end of two full years that Pharaoh had a dream and behold, he stood by the river.
I think it's significant.
God puts it in this place two full years.
The butler forgot him even after he interpreted the dream last week.
He's now
At this point, we'll see 13 years, falsely accused, betrayed by his brothers, a slanderous attack by Potiphar's wife against him, an innocent man put into this prison and enduring it for 13 years, and yet we see what an incredible life of faithfulness it is.
But God makes a point to us.
It's two full years.
That's on top of the 11.
This is 13 years that he has done this.
If you feel like you're in 13 years, God sees you.
God knows.
And maybe it's two years that you're in this pit and you're still like, I don't understand Lord.
For Joseph, I did what was righteous.
Could I possibly do this great wickedness?
We live in a world that doesn't even call wickedness, wickedness anymore.
And here's this 17 year old boy with no Bible, no youth group, no church, no pastor, no counselors.
No social media, no logos Bible software, no blue letter Bible, no Bible period.
And here he is knowing because God put his spirit upon him.
And the word in this, aren't this, is wickedness.
And I could never do this against my God.
And he somehow holds on to this incredible man.
And I want you to know that God knew, as we said last week, gives him two dreams because he's saying to Joseph,
These dreams for these butler and the butcher is to let you baker, to let you know that I know exactly where you are.
I haven't forgotten you.
And I know your hardship and I know your pain.
And I've been here the whole time and Joseph knows it and knew it as well without a doubt.
But you know, I speak that to you if you're hurting.
But you know what?
There's a room for her today.
We never know it.
What's going on in someone's life?
That's why God speaks to us.
Don't forsake the assembling of the brethren.
I understand there's periods of times where we have to and only can from home.
But you can't from home step into someone's life in this room and make a
friend get to know a brother or a sister so that you can be moved by God's Spirit in your heart for them to just come alongside and go, what's going on in your life?
Jesus would say in Matthew 25, you know it so well.
when I was naked, when I was hungry, when I was cold, and I love it, in the context of what we have, when I was in prison, you came to visit me.
You know, it doesn't have to be the county holding cell down the road here.
We can be imprisoned in our very pain of our hearts, almost numbed and crippled, and Jesus sends someone to come and visit when
God spoke to my heart as I shared with you in times past.
I was working at the space center, pinnacle of aerospace, launching rockets.
God just gifted me to make me understand those things and it was just a great job.
And I came to the knowledge of the saving grace of Jesus Christ and it was just a wonderful life in that
I had a great church, Calvary Chapel, Merritt Island.
I had a great pastor, teacher.
I had a great job.
I had a circle of friends.
And I was involved in ministries and missions and these type of things that God spoke to me.
Ray, I want you to step away from all of it.
And I want you to go to the Bible college.
I was like,
man this is I remember the the last night I was at Calorie Meredith Island we were doing worship and I was just weeping because I knew what I was leaving I knew there would never be another such a place like this for me in my time and season but I took what God called and knew it was from his heart and I went
Bible college was great, you know, people think you're, you know, lost your mind, whatever, you know, that's kind of a fun part of that type of life and this and that.
But what I want to tell you and I shared with you is that I expected to come back from Bible college and God to plug me into ministry immediately.
And I even had opportunities as I was nearing the end of Bible college with various ministries and then everything just evaporated.
God spoke my heart, come back to Merritt Island.
And I'll tell you what I have for you there.
And I come back and it was nine months of unemployment.
It was nine months that even people, after a few months, even the Christian believers that I had would come up and they would
Is it possible there's a sin in your life?
Or do you think maybe God's not pleased with you because you left your job and you went and you did this thing?
And I want to sit there and go, oh yeah, God's always angry with those who step out in faith.
I want to be sarcastic and stuff like that.
But you get these things and you hear these things and then you go home and you're all alone.
I don't understand these things, Lord.
But of course, he starts to develop and define and refine and you start seeing, oh, Bible college is one thing.
That was your undergraduate degree.
This long nine months of unemployment and the likes of it, you've moved into post-doc.
because you're going to see what's really in you.
And he did.
What was in me was different from what I learned and that I had to come to this place of total.
It's you and only you.
They're in me, dwells no good thing.
And apart from you, I can do nothing.
But here's really the core of the point.
I had met a
Bible college graduate that I didn't know, he came home whenever I went out there, so we're separated.
We never, then we meet at Merritt Island and he's teaching Sunday school.
I'm teaching Sunday school.
And he invites me to come over to his, this is a month's into it, has the timing crossing and stuff like that, big church.
So he invites me over to his house.
He had a five year old daughter.
named Hannah and his wife was Susan.
His name was Marty.
They invited me over for dinner and while his wife is preparing the meal, he goes, let's take a ride on our boat down the river, just a simple boat.
They were just the modest people, but the boat, we got it in the river and we run down the river and we were just enjoying the nature.
Then we pull off and we beach the boat.
And we just kind of walking through the water, looking for oysters and stuff like that.
And he goes, so Ray, what's going on in your life?
I go, man, I can't get a job.
I'll just be honest, it's hard.
I just want to serve the Lord.
And he stops right there and he looks at his daughter and he goes, Hannah, let's pray for Ray.
And the three of us are holding hands.
A little hand is five years old.
She turned into amazing missionary doctor, amazing story of faith and God's provision.
And the three of us are holding hands and they pray for me.
And we get back in the boat and we go back to the house, we eat dinner, we go in the backyard, we pick oranges and just talk and eat from the oranges and stuff like that.
And it was manna from heaven.
That was 30 years ago.
What's my main takeaway that I'm trying to tell you?
I don't remember one Bible verse that anybody quoted me in nine months.
I don't remember any of it.
But obvious, 30 years later, when I came to this verse, that's the first story, that's the first
thing that I remembered, somebody who came alongside me in the midst of my suffering and my hardship and just loved me and just gave me living water.
And you and I have this incredible opportunity to do just that, to do that to those who are thirsty, hungry, imprisoned,
and these type of things.
And so what an opportunity God has given us.
And, you know, I love this as we've studied the Book of Mark in times past and there's a word that continually stands out in the Book of Mark immediately.
immediately immediately immediately immediately you know mark 118 then immediately they left their nets and followed him mark 131 so he came and took her by the hand and lifted her up and immediately the fever left her and she served him there's just immediately over and over you know what just demonstrates to us in our life with our god we never know the day of immediately
And Joseph's here 13 years.
He did not know today was going to be an immediately change in his life.
He's going to go from a pit to a palace.
It's going to be number two in the greatest nation of the world at the time.
It's Egypt.
And then as we'll see seven years later, all the nations will have to come to Joseph.
His dream is going to come the past, but there's an immediately you will never get to your immediately if you quit today.
What would happen if Joseph quit?
If today's message and I believe, you know, I used to start ministry with like, I just want to, you know, I'm going to teach and we're going to go down to the nth degree and all those things.
And then God just brings me to this place of there is a place that we just go.
If we can just come here and get a word from the Lord to hold us on for one more week, then it was well served.
but you will never have your immediately if you quit today.
What would have happened if Joseph would have left and quit?
We wouldn't have verse two.
We wouldn't have verse one.
But verse two goes on to say two through eight and Pharaoh has a dream and we're gonna read it a couple times so
We'll read through this.
Verses two through eight.
Suddenly there came up.
Here's the dream.
Suddenly there came out of the river seven cows, fine looking and fat and they
fed in the meadow.
Then behold, seven other cows came up after them out of the river, ugly and gaunt, and stood by the other cows on the bank of the river.
And the ugly gaunt and gaunt cows ate up seven fine-looking and fat cows, so Pharaoh awoke.
My friend, seeing the atom, said one couple of the cows had signs that said eat more chicken on.
Verse five, so he slept and dreamed a second time, and suddenly seven heads of grain came up on one stalk, plump, and good.
Then behold, seven thin heads blighted, and by the east wind sprang up after them.
And the seven thin heads devoured the seven plump and full heads, so Pharaoh worked
awoke and indeed it was a dream.
Now it came to pass in the morning that his spirit was troubled and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt and all the wise men and Pharaoh told them his dream but there was no one who could interpret them for Pharaoh.
This is interesting and a couple of points here.
So we see a seven and a seven here.
We're seeing the cows and then we'll break this down even more in the wheat that we're seeing here.
But in Egypt, what were the pyramids made for?
Because pharaohs were gods, right?
So here's God who couldn't interpret the dream.
That's pretty amazing.
Pharaoh calls for these magicians, but he was at the time viewed as God, and he couldn't interpret this dream.
I think what else is pretty amazing is that whatever God is intervening here is that these wise men and magicians, they don't come and try to spend some story.
Pride would immediately go, I have the interpretation, yet all of them remain quiet.
And what's fascinating here is he tells the dream.
You know, we know, with Nebuchadnezzar, I'm not telling you to dream.
And if you don't tell me to dream, if you can't interpret it, I know you're all phonies.
I'm going to kill you.
He actually tells them to dream.
And they still can't and won't come and try to speak and say something.
But here's some interesting applications that we're going to see here is Pharaoh goes to the world looking for answers.
And that's the world we live in.
People have no answers.
They're troubled by whether it's dreams or the thoughts of their mind of what's going on in the world and these type of things in their lives.
And so they go to the world for answers.
And here we are.
After last week, oh, there's so much, you know, I'm not on social media.
Praise the Lord.
but I hear enough of it that I don't have to be some of the things that I hear about reasons for someone's life to be taken like it was Charlie Kirk's fault and these type of things.
People are looking for answers and so they'll go to the world, give us any type of answer because if I'm really honest with what I just heard and saw, this is troubling.
So then the world comes with some just ridiculous answer.
Today, there's going to be an answer.
We've seen answers.
Charlie Kirk's wife, Erica, she gave an answer two days later.
There's going to be an answer that comes today at 2 p.m. that the world's going to know that this was a grain of wheat that God was willing to give for one, which is amazing for us.
It's an amazing thought that God knew all along, as the Psalm tells us, note a number of your days, that God knew all along from the beginning of his life to the moment.
that this would be the moment.
God knew that.
It's not a surprise.
It had to go last week through the God filter for that to happen.
And God knew all along this was the day, and yet He's for 31 years shaping all these things and rising up a ministry to be what it is today.
more than political activism.
It's about why the Word of God says what the Word of God says and how you can have a relationship with him.
The world's looking for answers.
They're always looking for an answer.
Here comes Pharaoh.
Go into the world.
Give me an answer.
They can't give an answer.
But I find this interesting in that here's what we know because we know we've been given insight.
This dream came from the Lord.
That's why Daniel's going to be able to interpret it.
I mean, Joseph, and he's going to say, are not interpretations from the Lord.
So this dream did not come from the devil because devil has no knowledge of the future.
He would not know seven years of plenty, seven years of famine.
But I'll tell you this, why we do the prophecy update once a month at the end of the month.
The devil knows enough that he can gather that so far everything that you've written has come to pass.
I thought I had victory there in the garden, wrong.
Thought I had victory there up on the cross, wrong.
I sat in that joy for three days thinking I had silenced you, and then you rose again from the dead, totally slapping down all the power that I had thought I had.
So I know that I can't defeat you, but my goal is possibly if I can delay you, and then we start coming in and reading the book of Revelation.
And I want to say, devil can't read
He doesn't know the future.
He's not a omniscient.
And I also put this out to the devil, John 4, who's in you, then he who's in the world.
He can't read your mind either.
But what he will do is cast thoughts.
And then when you bite on those thoughts and you start reacting to those thoughts, he doesn't have to read your mind.
He planted those thoughts.
And so there's this thing that I give praise to the Lord as I look at things like this is there's a limitation.
The devil couldn't interpret this.
And so there is where his limitation is.
But here's what I know and I love and I could spend more time on it.
But we're going to cover a whole chapter is our goal as we do a whole chapter is there is one who knows your thoughts.
Read your mind as the word that said.
Psalm 139 verse two, you know my city down, my rising up, you understand my thoughts so far off.
Jeremiah 2911, for I know the thoughts that I think toward you says, Lord, thoughts of peace and not an evil, not of evil to give you a future in the hope.
What thought would you like to share with him today?
He already knows it.
Sometimes I think we're trying to hide from it like we don't want to become honest with it.
We call it confession.
Confess means to agree with.
If we confess our sins, these faithful and just forgive us our sins and cleanse us from all unrighteously wants us to come to him.
Be honest with him.
I know you know these thoughts.
In fact, the thoughts that you have toward me, the number of the greens of sand and the stars in the heaven.
And if you think these great thoughts towards me, you want me to come and share my thoughts with you so that we can talk about this.
Maybe it is something you need to.
get right and fix up and clean up and get rid of.
But maybe it's just a heartache again.
Maybe it's something you're just, I don't understand these things.
And the Lord will come and he'll speak to you and minister to you in this place.
But Satan is very limited.
He can cast thoughts, but he surely can't read thoughts.
Well, verse nine through 16, Joseph is called out of prison after all of this
time and pain.
Here's the immediate he woke up.
Might not even finish the second cup of coffee and here it comes the call.
Then the chief butler spoke
to Pharaoh saying, I remember my fault this day.
When Pharaoh was angry with his servants and put me in custody in the house of the captain of the guard, both me and the chief baker, we each had a dream in one night and I, each of us, dreamed according to the interpretation of his own dream.
Now when there was a young Hebrew man with us there, a servant,
of the captain of the guard, and we told him, and he interpreted our dreams for us, and each man he interpreted according to his own dream, verse 13, and it came to pass just as he interpreted for us, so it happened.
He restored to me my office, and he hanged with him.
And so again, we come to the place, ooh, I forgot, oops, did he?
He did, but was it divine amnesia?
Because
Psalm 105 tells us this very clearly.
Moreover, he called for a famine in the land.
He destroyed all the provisions of bread.
Verse 17, he sent a man before them.
Joseph, who was sold as a slave, they hurt his feet with fetters.
He was laid in irons until the time that the Word came to pass, the Word of the Lord tested him.
The King sent and released him the ruler of the people, let him go free.
He made him Lord of his house and ruler over all of his possession.
There's a prevention here.
God was preparing the man for the hour, the 14-year hour.
But he also put in that he was preventing because the time had not come in the fullness of time, that this is now the time.
Here comes the famine.
All the pieces are in place.
I knew this going in, that these things were setting back up.
And as we talked last week, if you were released two years ago, where would you be?
He wouldn't be in Egypt.
You wouldn't have gone back to Potiphar, looking for your job.
You'd have been so fast out of Egypt and back to the land of Canaan.
And so God keeps his man where he needs him to be for the moment that's going to rise.
Can you see that in your life?
And I can sit and I can go, it doesn't feel like it.
But then when you have some days you go, that was, if I wasn't there, wow, this is an amazing thing that you've done.
Well, verse 14 and 16,
Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph and they brought him quickly out of the dungeon and shaved 13 years he hasn't shaved or however long it's been And shaved changed his clothes and came to Pharaoh and Pharaoh said to Joseph I've had a dream and there is no one who can interpret it, but I have heard it said that
of you that you can understand and dream and interpret it.
So Joseph answered Pharaoh saying, is it not in, it is not in me.
God will give Pharaoh an answer of peace.
Amazing.
Joseph R.A. knows it's going to be a answer of peace.
But here we go.
Pharaoh went to the world looking for an answer.
Got none.
And here's the beauty of being Christians.
Here's the beauty of the power that we have of Christ living in us.
God sends his man to the world to give the answers that the world cannot and does not have.
We are put into our places wherever they may be, our children, our grandchildren, our workplace, the ball field, the campus, the high school, college, wherever it may be.
We are put in this place to bring answers to a world that has questions, that has no answers, and this is an amazing thing, and look at what Joseph does.
I can answer this, and here's the price.
You want the answer?
I want my freedom.
I want 14 years in back pain.
I want to chariot with the fastest horses so that I can get out of town as soon as possible.
He literally comes in not just in the humility and he speaks the word.
Only God can give this answer.
So when you get this answer, know that it's from the Lord.
But he comes in with this humility that even
He doesn't put a requirement on these things.
He simply comes and I'm going to trust the Lord.
You gave me the interpretation.
He already knew going in that it was going to be peaceful.
He didn't come and like he was answering like it's going to be an answer of peace for you.
It's going to turn out well for you.
And so he comes with this amazing and as we said two weeks ago,
Our message there in chapter 39 as we looked at Joseph, 1 Corinthians 10, 31, therefore whatever you eat or drink, whatever you do, do it all for the glory of God.
In our study, we looked at Joseph
being faithful to the task that was giving him in Potiphar's house.
And we said, whatever you do, do for the glory of God in the task that he gives you.
Then we saw the temptation and temptations are what comes from the devil because God won't tempt us with evil.
When Potiphar's wife came day after day after day, whatever you do, do for the glory of God.
And he brought this tremendous glory by refusing the temptation.
that was put before him.
And then we said, coming into the prison, whatever you do, do for the glory of God.
And he did it when it came to trials.
Because God put him in this trial, not the temptation that was of the devil, gave him a way out.
And so here he is still living these type of things that whatever I'm going to do, I'm going to do it for the glory of God.
And can I share this?
Just to remind us all, you know when we share the gospel,
at the ultimate end, it's for God's glory, even if they say no.
We can hear no enough that we can become discouraged, but when we come and it is, I'm going to share the gospel so that God might be glorified.
There's a God in heaven who loves you, who died for you.
has prepared a way for you to have a personal relationship with him and your sins be forgiven.
Even if they say no in the world, there's plenty who are saying no this week.
I don't want it because they love their sin, but God's glorified because I'll just, let's just accept the fact they will perish someday.
They will stand before him and they will give an account for one thing and one thing only.
What did you do with Jesus Christ?
Not what did you do at work?
What did you do for the poor?
What did you do?
What did you do with my son, Jesus Christ?
And God will be glorified that even if they say no, they'll go, but I sent my servant to you to share what needed to be done.
And you said no.
And I believe when we give people counsel as brothers,
Sisters, there's a place, let our council be.
This council that I give you is from the Lord because it's based on the Word of God.
It's not my opinion.
It's not what I think you should do in this situation.
We simply come and go, this is what the Word of God says.
And this is what you will need to do to respond to it.
And I'll tell you this, if you're in ministry,
If you, whatever you do, you do it for the glory of God first and foremost, you'll never burn out.
Ever.
It's the minute that we start fading from that I'm doing this for the glory of God.
When we lose our humility and humility is
I am a created being called to serve the great Creator God Himself.
And my life is called that I am, and we talked about this for the last couple of weeks, of what can I do to bring you, person before me, work, ministry, wherever, before the throne?
When I meet you, when I speak to you, what can I, Lord?
I'm asking you right now, help me get this person to your throne that they can be ministered to by you and your word.
You will never burn out.
In fact, you will find great boldness in it as well because whatever you're doing, you're going to do it for the glory of God.
Well, Pharaoh, Joseph's going to interpret Pharaoh's dream.
It's a repeat, so we'll just read it mostly.
Let's look at verses 17 through 24.
Then Pharaoh said to Joseph, behold in my dream I stood on the bank of the river.
Suddenly seven cows came up out of the river, fine looking and fat and they fed in the meadow.
Then behold seven other cows came up after them poor and very ugly and gaunt.
Such ugliness as I had never seen in all the land of Egypt.
And as the gaunt and ugly cows ate up the first seven, the fat cows, when they eat
eating them up, no one would have known what they had eaten them, for they were just as ugly as at the beginning.
So I awoke, he's saying, they didn't even gain a pound after all that.
Verse 22, also I saw in my dream, and suddenly seven heads came up, one stalk, full of good.
Then behold, seven heads withered thin and blight by the east wind.
I think that east wind is speaking to us that it's going to cause a
The famine is going to be caused by the lack of water.
Spring up after them and the thin heads devoured the seven good heads, so I told this to the magicians, but there was no one who could explain it.
to me."
So he repeats the dream, verse 25, then Joseph said, the dream of Pharaoh are one.
God has shown Pharaoh what he is about to do.
Out of the mouth of two or three witnesses, a matter is established.
It's why Joseph got his dream twice.
That's why there was two dreams in the prison with the butler and the butcher.
And now Joseph is saying, this is established.
And I love it that it's established because verse 26 through 27 or 31
There's a message that's spoken to us.
The seven good cows are seven years and seven good heads are seven years.
The dreams are one.
And seven thin and ugly cows which came up after them are seven years and the seven empty heads
heads blighted by the east wind or seven years of famine.
This is the thing which I've spoken to Pharaoh.
God has showed Pharaoh what he is about to do.
Indeed, seven years of great plenty will come throughout all the land of Egypt.
But after them, seven years of famine will rise and all the plenty will be forgotten in the land of Egypt and the famine will deplete the land so the plenty will not be known in the land because of the famine.
Following for it will be very severe Seven great seven bad.
We know these things, you know, it's interesting and there's a whole nother study here We keep seeing we'll see Jesus through Joseph continually and maybe one day we'll do a summary study on that but Seven great years everybody's living good throughout the whole land The seven bad years hits everybody, you know, it's interesting to me as we just finished study in the book of Revelation and
God will use seven severe years we know as the tribulation period to do what?
To bring Israel to the Savior.
And here comes Jacob and his boys in the seven bad years will get there and they have to come to the Savior Joseph a picture of Jesus who will save them from the famine that will
kill them, just beautiful pictures all the way through.
But I love verse 32, and it speaks a word for us.
And the dream was repeated the Pharaoh twice because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass.
You know what I love?
That Pharaoh yields to it.
Okay.
He doesn't try to build a golden statue and change the color of it like Nebuchadnezzar.
I hear what you're saying, but I'm gonna
I'm going to change the story and make it come the past.
Pharaoh immediately like, okay, we're going to see.
This came from the Lord because this man, the spirit is upon him.
We'll talk about that there in a second.
And what Joseph is speaking, the Pharaoh is these 14 years cannot be undone.
They can't be undone.
And Pharaoh receives that.
And again, just an encouragement, maybe you're in 14 years, maybe you're in 13 years, maybe you're in two years.
And there's just something that is pressing against you.
The thing has been established in your life.
If you're not in sin, this is of the Lord.
If you're in sin, repent and get right with the Lord and he'll start working through with that.
But I'm talking, you're just going through a hard time.
You're going through these trials.
Can I say this?
Do not get resentful.
Do not get bitter, because it will destroy you.
If you are waiting for someone on this earth to make something right, you will never be in peace.
You have to get yourself out of this earth, get you into the heavenlies, and not wait for another person to make things right.
because they may never come, ever, but you come and get yourself before the throne and say, Lord, this is, this is what's happened.
I know the God filter, it's gone through, and I'm just gonna sit here, help me, Lord, not be bitter, help me, Lord, not be resentful.
And we're gonna see that with Joseph as we read on.
And so, Joseph's gonna give wise counsel
verse 33 through 37.
Every one of these is their own study, but I love the context as we do this.
Now therefore, let Pharaoh select a discerning and wise man and set him over the land of Egypt.
Let Pharaoh do this and let him appoint officers over the land to collect one fifth of the produce of the land of Egypt in seven plentiful years.
So 20% tax.
Would we not be happy here in America?
If that's all we had to pay, normally it would only be 10% from history books that I've read.
Take that for what it's worth.
Verse 35, and then, and let them gather all the food of those good years that are coming and store up grain under the authority of Pharaoh.
Let them keep food in the cities.
Verse 36, then the food shall be as reserved for the land for the seven years of famine.
which shall be in the land of Egypt that the land may not perish during the famine.
So the advice was good in the eyes of Pharaoh and in the eyes of all of his servants.
You know, I love Joseph.
It's our classic Calvary Chapel inductive Bible study.
He is doing a classic observation interpretation application observation.
This is what the word of God says interpretation.
This is what the word this word means.
But you know, none of it means anything if there's not an application.
Everywhere to God I take, I have to say, what does this mean to me?
I understand now, how do I apply it in my life?
And when we get to share a scripture with somebody in their time and need, we're not there to preach, but oh, the power, if we've prepared ourselves to go, I got a word of the Lord for you.
I know the thoughts that I think towards you, thoughts of peace, not of evil to give you a future in hope.
Hey, listen, friend.
The people of Israel are in Babylon.
They got 70 years of hard time.
They're probably ready to quit and give up.
That's the context.
But God sends a word to them in the midst of it and say, but I see you and I have a plan for you.
Settle in where I put you, build houses, make businesses,
but I got a future and a hope for you.
And when we give people the word, let the word, come with your heart, be prepared for them.
And lots of times when, you know, I get a text and I do my best to, or an email, or if I try to do my best to respond as soon as I can, because, you know, I understand the situation, but I never respond too quick.
I go to the Lord, Lord, what can I do right now to bring this person to the throne?
If it's good times or not, even if it's bad times, what can I give them to the throne?
And Lord, would you give me a word to share with them?
And Lord, give me a word that has a meaning behind it for their situation.
Oh, what a glory we get to live and be part of.
in this life.
Well, verse 38 through 44, Joseph chosen by Pharaoh.
And again, we'll read him through.
And Pharaoh said to his servants,
Can we find such a one as this man in whom is the spirit of God?
Then Pharaoh said that Joseph in as much as God has shown you all this, there is no one as discerning and wise as you.
You shall be over my house and all my people shall be ruled according to your word.
Only in regard to the throne will I be greater than you."
Pharaoh recognizes the quality of this man.
He recognizes the spirit.
that's upon this man and again, no university, no youth group, no young adult group, no counseling hotline, no Bible.
I don't think he recognizes Pharaoh necessarily.
This is the Holy Spirit that we know, but he recognizes this.
There's something spiritual about this young man.
And I just say, Lord, for me, I wish the world would recognize there's something spiritual about this man.
When he speaks, when he's different from the rest of the world.
And he speaks things that senses that were taken out of this world into something spiritual.
And I think that's a good prayer that we can all ask the Lord.
Lord, like Joseph,
I just want to move in the things of the spirit and the world that I'm at and the influence and the impact that I have.
Well verse forty through forty two you shall be over my house and all my people shall be ruled according to your word only in regard to the throne will I be greater than you and Pharaoh said to Joseph see I've set you over all the land of Egypt then Pharaoh took his signet ring off his hand put it on Joseph's hand and they clothed him in garments of fine linen and put gold chain around his neck and so
symbols of power, the signet ring, when you stamp ink onto a document, thus it's written, thus it shall be done, right?
We've all seen the movie.
If there's wax for something that's going to be shipped and it has a rope around it with a wax seal, the signet ring, and that goes, oh, that's Joseph.
Actually, in this case, it's Pharaoh.
And just for the context,
when we've all seen your Brenner, right?
This is what Joseph would look like in that what we read there.
Here to been shaving down.
just as, because he's going to be a servant in Egypt now.
So he'd have been fully shaven down.
And when you see them with that ponytail thing, like, you'll bring her at a wig, according to the history books that we read.
So he would have been shaven down, cleaned up.
It's not a big gold bling bling.
It's that gold collar thing that would have went around that we see from the history books.
So it had been shaven clean and had a clean robe on.
And they would have probably done that eye, that black eye makeup thing, too.
So this is what Joseph looks like, is he
comes before Pharaoh, just in interesting thoughts.
But he's going to give him all the things of power, and yet it doesn't move Joseph.
Look at verse 43.
and 44, and he had him ride in the second chariot, which he had, and they cried out before him, bowled the knee, so he set him over all the land of Egypt.
Pharaoh also said to Joseph, I am favor, Pharaoh, and without your consent, no man may lift his hand or foot in the land of Egypt.
Just a word as we hit these next couple points, but again, Proverbs 1533,
The fear of the Lord is the instruction of wisdom and before honor is humility.
We'll never have the honor of the Lord without humility first.
Just humbled were your servant and Lord your put me in the place of honor so that I can bring people into your presence.
And Joseph serves Pharaoh interesting.
Here we're going to read Joseph gets a Gentile bride.
See the picture of Jesus fascinating.
In Pharaoh called Joseph's name, and this is the only time we'll see it, Zaphnath, Panath, and he gave him as a wife, Asnea, the daughter of Patey Fira, not Patefer, priest of own.
So Joseph went out over all the land of Egypt.
Joseph was 30.
years old when he stood before Pharaoh, King of Egypt, and Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh and went throughout all the land of Egypt.
Young singles, this isn't anything to endorse evangelistic dating.
Joseph is put in this place.
He's marrying this non is
Jewish woman, but it's a picture of Jesus because here Jesus came, married to Israel, but who does he take?
He takes the Gentile bride.
Why does Jesus take the Gentile bride?
Because there's a conversion that comes into the belief of the one true and living God.
So I have this place in my personal opinion that she
though she was the priestess or the daughter of a priest, she came along to understand who the true God was through Joseph.
Now, anyways, verse 47 through 52.
Forgetting the past.
Now in the seven plentiful years, the ground brought forth abundantly.
So he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were in the land of Egypt and laid up the food in the cities.
He laid up 11 in every city, the food of the fields which surrounded them.
Joseph gathered very much grain in the sand of the sea until he stopped counting for it was immeasurable.
And to Joseph were born two sons before the years of the famine came.
whom asked nath the daughter of Patapara, priest of own board to him.
Joseph called the name of firstborn Manassas.
For God had made him forget all my toil and all my father's house.
In the name of the second he called Ephraim.
For God it calls me to be fruitful in the land of my affliction.
I know I hit our timing mark that we're used to.
But these two points, they're vital for somebody here today.
I know you've been hurt.
I know you're hurting for whatever it may be.
Our brother Paul would say in Philippians 3.12, not that I've already attained,
or I'm already perfected, but I press on that I may lay hold of that for which Christ Jesus has also laid hold of me.
Brother and I do not count myself to have apprehended, but one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind me and reaching forward to those things which are ahead, I press towards the goal or the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus.
Forget the past.
Don't let it rob you.
We started with the discussion.
Do we believe this?
All things work together for good for those who love God.
But you know, verse 29 is often missed in the context for whom he foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his son.
We have more than a destination.
Beloved, we have an image
that God is shaping and forming through all these things in our life.
And had Joseph not forgot, he would never have come to Ephraim, which means fruitful.
And there's a place for all of us.
Satan would love to come up and bring your past before you came to Christ.
All the things that you've failed in.
But here's what he says in the fruitfulness that God
John 10, 10, we know the thief comes to steal, kill, and destroy, but Jesus Christ have come that they may have life and that more abundant.
And the abundance of the life that we have is 2 Corinthians 5, 17.
Therefore, if anyone be in Christ Jesus, he's a new creation.
Old things have passed away and all things have been made new.
What a beautiful word from the Lord.
A message written into the heart of this young man so that we can see I'm forgetting all those things.
I'm second in command, but I didn't swing by Potiphar's house.
You know who would be at the first meeting that Joseph held as second in command as a staff meeting?
Potiphar would have been there.
And look at this.
Potiphar had to be shaking and Joseph's like, just sit down.
Just sit down.
The way he treats his brothers is we'll read in the chapters to come.
It's the way he would have treated Potiphar.
Who else should be shaking?
Potiphar's wife.
He doesn't go for him just forgetting all these things.
I'm moving on and I'm going to be crippled by these things.
But before I finish this last point, these two names obviously saw me struggle through Joseph's name given to him in Egypt and his wife's name.
But you know what these two names are?
They're Hebrew names.
Joseph's not conformed to the Hebrew culture.
He's not gonna, well, being the second in command, I should put some Egyptian names.
You know, this would be good for my career and this and that.
Now, he is totally unconformed to the world.
He stays Joseph all the way through this, even in the naming of his sons.
He gives them this and he's sending a message to them, this isn't our home.
And someday, God's gonna do something.
Don't know when and how, but he will.
And then the last point, just to read through, seven years of famine sets us up for next week.
Then the seven years of plenty, which were in the land of Egypt, ended.
And the seven years of famine began to come, and Joseph had said the famine was in all lands, but in the land of Egypt there was bread.
So when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread.
Then Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians,
Go to Joseph, whatever he says to you.
The famine was over, all the face of the earth, and Joseph opened all the storehouses and sold to the Egyptians, and the famine became severe in the land of Egypt.
So all countries came to Joseph in Egypt to buy grain because the famine was severe in all the land.
Never know what God's raised in you up for.
the moment of time that God put you in.
And I believe we're in a moment of time in the nation and a great nation.
And we're here for this time.
And I close with this thought for you of something to apply.
We had lots of application personally.
But I just want to give you this.
There's a famine in the land today.
Amos 811, behold, the days are coming, says Lord.
that I will send a famine on the land, not a famine of bread, nor thirst for water, but of the hearing of the Word of God.
You know what's amazing?
I have been hearing story after story.
Even people that I know, I have family members who are starting to read the Bible because of this grain of wheat that has fallen into the ground.
Church, we have this tremendous opportunity and it's the easiest evangelism in the world.
We give them the word that became flesh and dwelt among us.
We give them this Bible and we say, this is my greatest treasure and I give it to you.
You go in the workplace and you'll be surprised how many people I've watched people come to tears
who you would think were the hardest people in the world.
But they see their name written on the word.
And then in the cover, we put Isaiah 49, 16.
See, have I not inscribed you on the palm of my hand?
We go, God has inscribed you on the palm of his hand.
And so it's a ministry here.
There's no cost to you.
Except the willingness to boldly go and give this word.
And I think there is a time and the time is now like no other time.
So you write your name real clear, write it down, talk to Paul back there and he'll help you and we'll print you, you want to give that, but you want one for yourself because I want this word with my name.
Write it down real clear, gotta be clear.
And then we got multiple sizes and colors, it's just a beautiful ministry.
And Lord, you've overheard and you've been so faithful to us, you've been faithful.
to Joseph, and he's a picture of your faithfulness.
And we read more than a story.
We read more than his story.
We read his story, Jesus Christ.
And you were written all over these pages, and you say to us, you come in the volume of the book.
It's written of you.
And Lord, I thank You for this word that You've given us.
I thank You for a time that we have.
I thank You for the chapter that we're in for the day that is upon us.
And Lord, I do close.
We as a family, we pray for safety there in Phoenix.
We pray for a protection around that place from the evil one in his ways.
We pray for the technology that it would be
cannot be disrupted by the prince and power of the air, and that your word would go out.
And not just thousands, but millions of people will hear this word and let it penetrate their hearts.
The gospel will be declared, and there will be a message that will be spoken that he's not dead.
He merely changed locations.
And where he is, we too shall be, give hope to those that are hurting.
But Lord, use this day as just a great moment in the history of America, where tens of thousands, even millions, will come to know you as Lord and Savior.
And Lord, I pray for us, speak to our hearts, who would we give the Word of God to, that they can hear the heart that you have for them?
knowing without a doubt, this word does not return void.
And we pray this in your name, amen.
If you got to go,